If you were in the 1970s during the Cold War, they wanted to know if someone had sent you
intercontinental ballistic missile on your country, you had two choices: to send the satellite to space
which at that time was very expensive, impractical, and you probably would not even have
or build a radar system
But the radar only sees the horizon, it will show you a rocket in flight, but at that moment
whatever you notice, it may be too late. Do you need to know,
that the rocket flies to you as soon as it's launched. You need a radar strong enough to get its signal from the ionosphere
it would be extended to thousands of miles, and still strong enough to be detected after it bounces back.
You need a huge amount of energy and one of the largest radar systems ever built.
You need something like this.
Welcome - Duga-3 Radar System, Chernobyl
This was known in the West as a Russian Woodpecker. After more than a decade accidentally
jumped into shortwave radio bands, trying to find the best one to receive the received signal by transmitting
repeating: rat-ttttt, which sounded like a bitch. It was so strong that
countries around the world have filed official complaints about the Soviet Union, and
there were also small groups called "The Russian Dating Club Love Club" or "Moscow Shock Absorbers" which displaced this signal
from your radio
There is another one, about sixty miles away. They work together in co-operation: one single sends and one accepts.
And it was necessary for it to be so big to get any result, so you could roughly - very
roughly estimate where the rocket is headed. But the really brilliant thing is that every radar system
similar to this one can see the difference between rocket and terrain. Because it is not
as you point the radar into the air: if you want to bounce the signal, then ground this signal
will reflect the same as the rocket flying over it does.
How do you know the difference?
Doppler phenomenon. Just like the police siren approaching you is a few tones above,
the radar signal reflected from the rocket will be at a higher frequency. And the missiles are
they move at speeds measured in miles per second. So Duga did not get the signal at the same frequency,
as his counterpart sent. He got a little higher. If it received such a received frequency so ..
Well, nothing like that happened. Fortunately. All this energy
all this disturbance was useless. Surprisingly. No one ever fired a rocket.
And somehow, in spite of all that was happening at the time, mankind went to health in the cold war.